The fbench_c128.bas program will run on BASIC 7.0 on the
Commodore 128.  Unfortunately, this implementation of BASIC only
provides 10 significant digits of accuracy for floating point
computations.  Consequently, the results of the computation do
not agree with the canonical results in the lower-order digits,
and thus do not pass the accuracy test required to be reported.

The result of running the program is as follows.

                            FOCAL LENGTH       ANGLE TO AXIS
MARGINAL RAY               47.09479110000      0.04178472690
PARAXIAL RAY               47.08372150000      0.04177864830

LONGITUDINAL SPHERICAL ABERRATION:    -0.01106962560
    (MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE):             0.05306749890    ACCEPTABLE

OFFENSE AGAINST SINE CONDITION (COMA): 0.00008954690
    (MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE):             0.00250000000    ACCEPTABLE

AXIAL CHROMATIC ABERRATION:            0.00448255241
    (MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE):             0.05306749890    ACCEPTABLE

Correct results to the last digit would be:

                            FOCAL LENGTH       ANGLE TO AXIS
MARGINAL RAY               47.09479120920      0.04178472683
PARAXIAL RAY               47.08372160249      0.04177864821

LONGITUDINAL SPHERICAL ABERRATION:     -0.01106960671
    (MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE):              0.05306749907    ACCEPTABLE

OFFENSE AGAINST SINE CONDITION (COMA):  0.00008954761
    (MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE):              0.00250000000    ACCEPTABLE

AXIAL CHROMATIC ABERRATION:             0.00448229032
    (MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE):              0.05306749907    ACCEPTABLE

As you can see, the most significant digits are correct, but the
limited precision induces errors in the least significant
digits.

The program is supplied in lower case ASCII, as that is what the
VICE emulator expects to be pasted into its console window.

Under the VICE x128 emulator on my development machine, 36
iterations ran for:
      292.77
      292.95
      292.68
      292.56
      292.47
Mean: 292.69  8132472 usec/iteration

C:
Mean: 296.536 1.7858 usec/iteration

Run time ratio compared to C: 4,553,966

Now we can compare against run time from the 1980s of the C-128
C port, with Abacus Software/Data-Becker Super-C 128, version
3.00. This ran 1000 iterations in 3466 seconds, or 3466000
microseconds per iteration, which is 2.35 times faster than the
simulated BASIC. The Super-C test was running in "fast" (2 MHz
mode), while I'm not sure about the BASIC (when I try to put the
simulator into fast mode, it hangs and requires a reset).  The
C128 C version had similar errors in the least significant
digits.

The only thing that can be learned from this exercise is that
the benchmark is effective in detecting floating point
implementations which provide insufficient precision.
